+++
title = "Hi."
description = """
I'm Roger Steve Ruiz. I am software engineer specializing in cloud
infrastructure, security, and application development. I'm currently open to
opportunities either full-time or on a contracting basis.
"""
+++

I‘m Roger Steve Ruiz, a software engineer with a focus on user-centered digital
services. I found my place in web development by coming in through the window,
specifically the browser window. Coming from a traditional graphic design
background, CSS and systems design were two things that felt as natural as color
theory and typography. As I learned more about the history of and fundamentals
of programming, I made my transition to full-stack web development with a strong
focus on front-end, back-end, infrastructure, and automation. I try to add
elements of the emotional in a world of the artificial. We’re all people who
work on computers, or sometimes inside other people's computers e.g. the cloud,
and it is easy to forget that people at the end of the day are the ones using
them. My career has taken me from the private sector to the public sector. I
enjoy both kinds of work, although the latter I find has the most to improve on
and biggest impact.

Currently, my career path has me in more staff+ roles. I‘ve been the most
interested in release engineering and building the necessary infrastructure and
processes to help teams ship and iterate on software of all kinds. I excel in an
open-source capacity as open-source software has predicated much of my career in
tech. I also sometimes find myself consistently working on a lot of different
projects and am considered the glue interconnecting them.
