+++
title = "Leadership styles of staff engineers"
date = "2022-08-14"
description = """When moving up in an individual contributor track, you will move
from senior exclusively-technical roles into a hybrid of technical & leadership roles. These
roles are usually fall under the **staff+ engineering path** which is a compliment to
the **engineering manager path**."""
slug = "leadership-styles-of-staff-engineers"
tags = ["management"]
+++

At the companies I've worked at throughout my career, I've had the pleasure of
finding myself in more & more senior positions. I attribute this to my curiosity
for trying to best understand how to help those around me. I try not to focus on
just the technical aspects of problem solving, but getting other people involved
to help solve the problem holistically.

Growing technically as an engineer is important, but there are numerous other
non-technical aspects that influence how software is built at more senior
levels. These levels fall under the *staff+ IC path*. These levels are all about
**increasing independence** at managing systems of **growing complexity**.

## What is the staff+ IC path?

There are lots of things engineers will need to be knowledgeable about as they
move up the ladder. As you move into more senior in the individual contributor
(IC) roles, you will need to focus on the *what needs to be done* rather than
the *how this gets done*. The expected scope gets more & more fuzzy. This means
that people are more a part of the system rather than just focusing on the
machinery of the system. As an engineer, you're expected to solve problems not
**just build systems**. As scope grows in complexity, people become more a part
of the system. This is why it's important for staff+ engineers to also have
lived-experience, big-picture thinking, and interpersonal skills beyond just
having core technical skills.

### Staff level

At this level, *you will work with people*. This means that rather than asked to
just implement something on your own you or with help, you'll be helping other
people implement things. This might look like leading an existing team that is
dependent on other teams for a project. At this level, you aren't creating a
team but you should start considering what the building blocks are of a great
team. Think of this team as a sub-team that's a part of something bigger. All of
the objectives for your team is set by what the larger team needs. There is a
lot of mentoring that goes on at this level.

### Senior staff level

At this level, you're moving on to building a team. This means that you're going
to be leading an independent project. An independent project is something that
has it's own customers. There is a lot more effort in the *what needs to be
done* here. The actual inputs you get are that from your customers. You will
need to figure out how to implement what your customers need.

### Principal level

At this level, you will be co-leading a larger organization. This means that you will
be constructing teams and understanding the business aspects of what you're
solving. This is where you'll have influence over different things across the
organization and where you'll need to work closely with others at this level to
strategically implement and achieve goals for teams.

### Distinguished level & beyond

At this level, nothing is out of scope. At other levels of seniority, you can
draw borders around responsibilities you have and other teams have. As a
distinguished+ engineer, you'll be responsible for figuring out how to solve an
issue. You will be driving strategy and initiate programs.

## The disciplines for engineers at the staff+ levels

As you move from being a senior engineer to a staff+ engineer, you'll encounter
more and more specific disciplines that are expected of you. As you move up
the staff+ engineering roles, you'll find that these disciplines will also be
needed more in collaboration with each other. These disciplines may not be
directly part of your job description. Don't consider each of these as something
that you need to be passionate about or equally good at. Your preferences for
these may also change over time as well.

If you're bootstrapping a team, you will find yourself working across all of
these disciplines until you build a team of people that focus on these skills.
Every team needs leadership in these four types. You'll need to know which roles
you're able to step into and advocate from those perspectives.

### Core technical skills

Core technical skills here are defined by what a typical practitioner of the
role works on. For instance if you're a *senior front-end engineer* moving into
a *staff role*, your core technical skills will should all the client-side
languages and frameworks you'll be using along with additional components such
*knowledge of building & implementing APIs* or **508-compliance** and possibly
**infrastructure** or the **deployment of client-side code**. This set of skills
will grow as you move up in seniority. You'll have to adapt to changes in the
industry and technologies as well. Becoming specialized in these core technical
skills alone though won't help you sustain this level. You will need to have at
least one of the other disciplines as a passion as well.

Just knowing a lot of technical skills will not let you bridge the gaps that are
created when people are brought into a system. So being exclusively focused on
growing your technical skills alone will not help you in staff+ roles. It's also
possible to branch out your technical skills further to become a bridge or
communicator, but that still stifles you if you don't have any of the other
disciplines below.

### Product management skills

Product management skills are related to being a strategic leader. You help
shape the direction of the product or the company. You will be focused on what
needs to be done and why it needs to be done. With this skill, it's important
that you maintain a narrative of all of this. For instance, for this discipline
you will be focused on *how do we continually ship a feature in waves* along
with *coming up with the milestones needed for a feature's completeness*.

You'll also focus on defining the goals as well. These can include something
like *make deployments faster* in order to *increase the release cycle of
software*.

### Project management skills

Project management skills are related to the practical nature of being able to
achieve goals. The main skill at play here is removing chaos and tracking the
tasks. You'll have to identify what is blocked and make sure it gets unblocked.
This requires operational leadership and communication both internally and
externally to your team.

### People management as a skill

People management skills are related to becoming a mentor to the company. You
are the kind of person that other ICs turn to for help and advice. Because
you'll be interacting directly with people, you have the ability to turn a
random group of people into a team. Also, you'll be dealing directly with people
problems and challenges.

### Experience as a skill

With experience, you will need to be the person who injects a bit of care into
other's ideas. Experience matters because you are more likely to have a
level-head around situations that you've seen before. For example, more junior
engineers may be unprepared for how to deal with an incident. But if you have
this experience, you will be less likely to lose your cool around incidents
because you've been a part of them before. Experienced engineers will
also have more *safety engineering* than *product engineering*. This is
important because rather than just focusing on *how things should work* you will
have a bigger focused on *how things might fail* the more experience you have.
Experience will also come from lived-experience and not just technical
expertise.

## Conclusion

Thanks for reading this far. I hope this has helped you understand the required
disciplines that you'll need to move forward beyond being a senior engineer. For
me personally, I fall under having lived-experience along with core technical
skills and product management. I am someone who tries to think of problems
holistically and ensure that the people helping solve the problem understand the
goals as well as the trade-offs to the solutions. It's also important to ensure
that everyone on the team feels like they're contributing effectively. The job
of a staff+ engineer is to try their best to lead from behind rather than
dictate how things should be implemented.
